Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today it’s
part two of our mini-series on
the making of modern Saudi Arabia.
In case you missed part one, it
was on Mohammed Bin Salman, MBS,
the Crown Prince, and the brains,
vision, and force behind it all.
Next up, in part three, we’ll be
talking about the grisly murder
of the journalist Jamal Khashoggi.
But today it’s time to talk about
a project that has been placed at
the centre of this vision for the
Saudi Arabia of the future, a city so
ambitious its critics call it impossible.
NEOM, a desert city of the future.
So let’s not waste a minute,
and get right into it.
We’ve talked before about
people’s impressions about what
the future might look like.
If you look back at artists’ drawings
of “cities of the future”, people in
the 1920s imagining what a city in
the 2020s might look like, you are
often met with drawings of flying
cars, people living in pods, their
every wish met by robot butlers.
The reality is that most cities of the
2020s aren’t so drastically different
to how they were 100 years ago.
People still get around in cars, on
roads, they take buses, trams or subways.
Buildings might be taller and made out
of different materials, and if you go
to some cities at night it might look
like a science-fiction movie, with
bright neon lights flashing everywhere.
But urban life hasn’t had the
seismic shift, the sea change,
that many had predicted.
However, in October of 2017, at a
flashy investment conference in Riyadh,
Mohammed Bin Salman announced his
vision for the city of the future.
And this, well, it was
something very different.
It was to be called NEOM, and would
cover an area of 26,500 square kilometres
in the northwest of the country, near
the borders with Jordan and Egypt,
and just across the water from Israel.
It wasn’t just Saudi Arabia’s answer
to Dubai, it was something much bigger:
a vast, independent economic zone
which would operate semi-independently
to the rest of the country.
This was all part of the Vision 2030
plan, the strategy of diversifying
the Saudi economy away from oil.
As part of this, the NEOM region would be
centred around nine specialised investment
sectors to, and I’m quoting directly,
“drive the future of human civilisation”.
It would be funded by more
than $500 billion from the
Saudi Public Investment Fund.
Sure, a lot of money, but for a country
that was at times pumping $1 billion
dollars worth of oil per day, it was
within the realms of possibility.
Now, when NEOM was first announced,
there were a lot of buzzwords.
Everything was to be handled by Artificial
Intelligence, 100% of the energy would
come from renewable sources, it was
to be a “smart city like no other”.
And for the first few years, NEOM remained
a concept: something people talked
about at conferences or in magazines.
As far as any real construction, well
the area remained a vast piece of desert,
with a few construction sites the only
sign of what was planned out for it.
Then, in January 2021, came
the announcement of what
would be its centrepiece: a
smart city called “The Line”.
And although there are some other
pretty interesting bits of the
wider NEOM project, I’ll be talking
mostly about The Line today.
Now, most cities tend
to be sort of circular.
There is a centre, perhaps a historic
centre, and the city grows out from that.
There are exceptions, of
course—geographical barriers like
water or mountains might prevent
a city from spreading out in every
direction—but most cities naturally
expand from a central point.
The buildings in the centre, where
land is in highest demand and
therefore most expensive, tend to be
the tallest, and that’s where most
businesses and offices tend to be.
Then as you move out from the centre,
those tend to be more residential areas.
Again, there are many exceptions
to this, but this is how cities
tend to develop organically.
NEOM, and The Line, proposed to take
this blueprint for urban society,
this model for how almost every city
is set out, and turn it on its head.
Instead of a circle, the city would be
a straight line, 170 kilometres long.
But if you are thinking of just
one long road, with shops and
houses on each side, no no.
This line would be one,
massive skyscraper, towering
500 metres up into the air.
To give you a sense for quite how
big that is, it’s like one and a half
Eiffel Towers, taller than the very
tip of the Empire State Building or
the Petronas Towers in Kuala Lumpur.
It’s huge.
And this wasn’t just one part, it was
all of it, all 170 kilometres of it.
The Line would consist of two long
buildings, each 500 metres high, placed
opposite each other, and connected
by a series of walkways, bridges.
The result would be this completely
unique city: 170 kilometres in length, 500
metres in height, and 200 metres in width.
It would be like a massive glass
wall, towering up from the desert.
Its entire existence was based on
the concept of something called Zero
Gravity Urbanism, which is the idea that
instead of extending only horizontally,
cities should also extend vertically,
stacked on top of each other, as
if gravity had been cancelled out.
This would mean that all residents
would have access to every service
they might need, from parks to shops
to schools, as well as their place of
work, all five-minutes from their home.
And by doing this, you would
eliminate the need for cars.
Indeed, The Line would be
completely car free; there
wouldn’t even be a single road.
There would be lifts, of course,
but the only form of public
transport would be a high-speed
train which would run below ground.
It was, at the risk of sounding
cliche, a revolutionary idea.
NEOM wasn't just about building a city;
it was about demonstrating what an entire
society, built from the ground up on
futuristic principles, could achieve.
And it wasn’t just an idea, a vision
of some wacky architecture firm; Saudi
Arabia had the cash to actually do
it, or at least get started on it.
Construction was already happening, and
the plan was for it to eventually house
9 million residents, around a quarter of
the current population of the country.
It was hugely ambitious, and we
will come to the issues with such
ambition in a few minutes, but first
we need to underline one thing.
The Line, and NEOM more generally,
wasn’t just another megaproject
dreamed up by a committee of urban
planners, or an architecture firm
with eyes on a fat commission.
It was, reportedly, the personal vision
of Mohammed Bin Salman, the Crown Prince.
The idea had come to him,
according to a recent biography,
in an almost Sim City-like way.
He opened up Google Earth, zoomed
in on Saudi Arabia, the country
he knew he would one day rule.
He saw this huge swathe of desert
in the north west of the country.
It was relatively unpopulated–only a few
nomadic tribes–and not only did it have
wonderful white beaches with coral reefs,
but not far inland there were mountains
so high that they even got snow in winter.
And importantly, it was far away from
the traditional centres of power in
Saudi Arabia; Riyadh, the capital,
and both Medina and Mecca–the two
main religious sites–they were
all hundreds of kilometres away.
This area was a blank slate, perfect for
a city that could be built from scratch
without any of the baggage that might
come from trying to build it elsewhere.
Teams of expensive consultants were
brought in to work on the projects,
lured not only by the gargantuan fees
that would come if they were chosen to
lead the project, but also the prestige.
After all, this was the most ambitious
urban planning project in the world,
perhaps even in human history.
With extensive back and forth
between groups of consultants and
MBS himself the vision statement
for the project was chosen:
“The land of the future, where the
greatest minds and best talents
are empowered to embody pioneering
ideas and exceed boundaries in a
world inspired by imagination”.
Now, there is a lot of
management consultant-speak
there, but it isn’t all fluff.
Key to this entire project was
MBS’s firm belief that NEOM, and
The Line, wasn’t simply his vanity
project; it was to be an attractive
investment opportunity for foreigners.
See, there was no shortage of foreign
companies that would happily take Saudi
cash, but there was a serious shortage
of foreign companies who wanted to
invest in Saudi Arabia, who wanted
to put their money into the country.
This wasn’t right, MBS thought; Saudi
Arabia was the biggest country in
the Middle East by land area, and
was projected to have a population of
almost 50 million by the year 2050.
Its population was young and
increasingly educated and affluent.
And up until now, there had been limited
ways for Saudis to spend their money
in the country; many, especially rich
Saudis, preferred to go abroad, leading
to hundreds of billions of dollars in
“economic leakage”, as MBS put it; money
that was spent outside Saudi Arabia
that should be spent domestically.
Having an area like NEOM, which not only
brought foreigners and foreign investment
into Saudi Arabia but stopped Saudis
from heading abroad to spend their money,
well, this would help solve the problem.
And NEOM and The Line
did sound pretty unique.
A city with no cars.
A city where everything is
within a five-minute walk.
A city powered entirely by clean energy.
A city where AI—not humans—controls
basic functions like logistics,
maintenance, and power distribution.
A city where the climate is
moderated by technology, meaning
temperatures inside The Line would
be cooler than the desert outside.
To supporters, it was thrilling.
A blank canvas on which you could
rethink human civilisation from scratch.
To critics, it was something else
entirely—a sort of science fiction fever
dream, the urban-planning equivalent
of “the emperor’s new clothes”, where
everyone knows something is true but is
afraid to admit it, for fear of upsetting
the person in charge, and certainly in
this case, the person paying the bills.
Because, to state the obvious,
building a 170-kilometre-long,
500 metre high skyscraper in the
middle of the desert is…complicated.
The graphics, the videos, and the
marketing materials might make it look
sleek, futuristic and almost magically
simple, but it is anything but.
According to some engineers, much
of it is physically impossible on
anything like the promised scale.
So, let’s start with the basics.
Simply sourcing the materials for
The Line is a gargantuan task.
Some analysts have calculated that the
demand for steel, glass and concrete would
be so high it would distort the global
market, inflating costs for construction
projects everywhere else on Earth.
The foundations alone would be
one of the biggest construction
challenges in human history.
Then you have the environmental questions.
A 170-kilometre mirrored facade in
the middle of a desert—what would
that do to the local environment?
To the heat of the
surrounding environment?
To birds?
It would be right in the middle of a
migratory flight path, and to state the
obvious, this is a little different to
a small wind farm; it’s a 170 kilometre
wall, stretching 500 metres up in the air.
Some environmental scientists
warned of mass bird deaths
on a scale never seen before.
Then there were the human questions.
The area might look empty on Google Earth,
but there were still small settlements
and nomadic tribes that called it home.
What would happen to them?
There were temporary but no less
important questions about the rights
of the hundreds of thousands of migrant
construction workers who would be brought
in to make this project a reality.
If working conditions were anything
like those seen in other regional
megaprojects, critics warned that
the human cost of this futuristic
dream could be staggeringly high.
And as for the city itself, the projected
population was to be nine million people.
Was that in any way realistic?
Would people want to live there,
in a vertical, enclosed city?
Urban planners pointed out that
most successful cities grow
organically, adapting to geography,
culture, and economic demands.
The Line was the opposite: an entirely
artificial plan, imposed from above,
with no clear historical parallel.
Critics compared it to building
a city inside a shopping mall.
And then there were all the smaller
but no-less-important questions of
things like what happens in a fire?
Where would the rubbish go?
How would insurance work?
If the fast train to the airport
didn’t have baggage storage, how would
people get their bags to the airport?
And then, of course, there
was the question of cost.
The original estimate
was around $500 billion.
A huge amount of money,
even for Saudi Arabia.
But unofficial figures leaked from
within the project suggested costs
could reach $1 trillion, possibly
even one and a half trillion dollars.
Most staggeringly recent reports
indicate the final cost for the full
170 kilometres of The Line alone
could eventually hit $8.8 trillion.
Saudi Arabia is extremely wealthy,
but even for a petro state,
these numbers are staggering.
And then we come to the progress.
For all the glossy promotional videos,
drone shots, and futuristic renderings.
Many analysts noticed something
else: the actual construction
seemed incredibly slow.
Satellite imagery showed foundations
being laid, structures being started,
but nothing remotely close to the
rapid pace promised in the early years.
Meanwhile, some of those satellite
images revealed that construction
resources had been diverted to
build a massive royal palace with
16 buildings and a golf course.
In late 2023 and throughout 2024, reports
began emerging that the 170  kilometre
plan had quietly been scaled back.
Initially the target was revised
to complete around 16  kilometres
by 2030 with the full 170 to
be finished sometime later.
But by April, 2024, even that
reduced target proved too ambitious.
Officials slashed the 2030 completion
target from 16  kilometres down to a
mere 2.4  kilometres, just 1.4% of the
originally planned 170  kilometre city.
The population target for 2030 was also
cut dramatically from one and a half
million residents down to just 300,000.
And the timing for completing
the full 170  kilometres?
That was pushed back from 2030 all the way
to 2045, another 21 years into the future.
So there were all these reports that
things were quietly being scaled back.
And in November of 2025, there was
a bombshell report by the Financial
Times titled End of the Line, how
Saudi Arabia's NEOM Dream Unraveled.
This long report painted a picture of
a hugely ambitious project that, at
almost every point, came up against
the laws of physics and with a sponsor
that didn't take no for an answer, and
with a large vested interest in keeping
the project going, few people involved
seemed prepared to tell the truth.
MBS clearly revelled in the idea that he
would be able to push through a project
that so many critics said was impossible.
And if he could pull it off, well,
it might be expensive, but it would
be transformational for the country
and forever cement his legacy.
But then something changed.
In January of 2026, just a few weeks
ago, there was the first big announcement
regarding the future of NEOM.
It was announced that following
a year long strategic review, the
project is undergoing what officials
call a fundamental re-imagining.
The Line is to be redesigned
into something far more modest
than originally planned.
The focus appears to be shifting away
from the futuristic, linear city concept
towards something more practical: a hub
for data centres to support Saudi Arabia's
push into artificial intelligence.
In other words, the grand vision of
a car-free climate-controlled city,
where 9 million people would live in
a mirrored skyscraper stretching 170
kilometres through the desert is being
quietly abandoned in favour of massive
server farms with a view of the Red Sea.
And that's not all.
The Asian Winter Games, which were
supposed to be held at an all new
custom built NEOM ski resort in 2029
have been indefinitely postponed.
Now, part of what forced this
rethinking was simple economics.
Oil prices have fallen significantly
since NEOM was first announced.
According to Bloomberg, Saudi
Arabia needs oil at almost $100 a
barrel just to balance its budget,
and at $113 per barrel to fund the
Crown Prince's ambitious projects.
Oil is currently at around $60 a
barrel, so significantly below where
it needs to be, and with the country
also facing major costs for hosting
the 2030 World Expo and 2034 FIFA
World Cup, something had to give.
For Mohammed bin Salman for MBS, this
represents a significant personal setback.
It was his brainchild.
NEOM was supposed to be the crown jewel
of his Vision 2030, the project that
would define his legacy and prove Saudi
Arabia could build the impossible.
And yet,  this recent announcement
was an admission that it couldn't,
or at least it couldn't just yet.
So to wrap things up, who knows
what the future holds for this most
ambitious of urban planning projects.
Perhaps by 2045 when the full Line is now
theoretically scheduled to be completed,
some version of this dream will exist.
Perhaps you'll be listening to this
episode from a modest section of a
futuristic linear city on the Red Sea
Coast, powered by renewable energy
and surrounded by data centres quietly
humming away in the desert heat.
Or perhaps in 20 years time, the region
will be dotted with half finished
foundations and rusting steel, a memorial
to one of the most ambitious and most
expensive follies in human history.
Say what you want about NEOM, it
certainly is of unparalleled ambition,
but ambition, it turns out, is not
enough to build a city in the sky.
OK, then, that is it for today's
episode on NEOM and The Line, this
science fiction city of the future.
I hope it's been an interesting one
and that you've learnt something new.
As always, I would love to know
what you thought of this episode.
If you are from Saudi Arabia,
what do you think about this plan?
Will some version of it come off, or
do you think your country's resources
would be better off spent elsewhere?
And for everyone else,
would you move to The Line?
How would you feel about living
in a 500 metre tall smart city?
I would love to know, so let’s
get this discussion started.
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
And as a final reminder, this was
part two of a three-part mini-series
on the making of modern Saudi Arabia.
Part one was on the rise and life
so far of its Crown Prince, Mohammed
Bin Salman, and next up, part three
is going to be on the grisly murder
of the journalist Jamal Khashogi.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.